MongoDB - Case Study (#19)
NoroffFEU/development-platforms: mongoDB-case-study.md

---
title: MongoDB Product Case Study
keywords: development platforms, MongoDB project, NoSQL
tags: Development Platforms, MongoDB Project, NoSQL
sidebar: development-platforms
permalink: development-platforms/mongoDB.html
folder: development-platforms
---

## Introduction to MongoDB

> MongoDB is a open source NoSQL database management program that has focus on being scalable and flexible, allowing for storing of big amounts of data in a fast and agile database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MongoDB is a open source NoSQL database management program that has a focus on being scalable and flexible, allowing for the storage of large amounts of data in a fast and agile database.
```

MongoDB was created by the owners of a internet advertisement company, called DoubleClick, they struggled with the storage databases not being scalable and agile enough.
Instead of using tables and rows, like the SQL databases, MongoDB gathers information and data in collections and documents.

## Brief History

> In the early days, 1970s, NoSQL was just a supplement to the SQL ways of storing data. But as the internet grew and evolved, so did the users, the records and the size of data being stored. The SQL had limitations, and they became more and more apparent. So adopting a more flexible and scalable way to store data was a priority. This formed the evolution of NoSQL, and from that MongoDB arised.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the early days, 1970s, NoSQL was just a supplement to the SQL ways of storing data. But as the internet grew and evolved, so did the users, the records and the size of data being stored. SQL had limitations, and they became more and more apparent. Adopting a more flexible and scalable way to store data was a priority. This began the evolution of NoSQL, and from that MongoDB arose.
```

> In the points below, I will list the startup points to MongoDB, but also the biggest releases added to the database throughout the years.

Reviewer: In this style of writing we use:
- We `now we can look at this feature...`
- You `you can check this for yourself by visiting...`
- The author `In the opinion of the author, this is not enough...`

But we do not use:
- I

I is only used in opinion writing, whereas this is a technical document.

- 2007 - MongoDB was founded by Dwight Merriman, Eliot Horrowitz and Kevin Ryan.

> - 2007 - MongoDB the work begins and it was initially developed as a component of a planning platform as a service platform.

Reviewer: This sentence should be rephrased as it's difficult to read.

- 2016 - Released the version 3.4 - MongoDB Atlas released, same with Zoned sharding and MongoDB Connector for Apache Spark.
- 2017 - Released the version 3.6 - Fully managed MongoDB Atlas. change streams to build always-on, real time, reactive applications.
- 2018 - Released the version 4.0 - Offers multi-document ACID transactions. MongoDB Atlas Global Clusters and enterprise security controls, and MongoDB Charts.
- 2019 - Released the version 4.2 - MongoDB Atlas Search and MongoDB Atlas Data Lake. And MongoDB Operator for Kubernetes and MongoDB Connector for Apache Kafka.
- 2020 - Released the version 4.4 - MongoDB Atlas Online Archive, Realm & Sync, MongoDB Atlas multi-cloud clusters.
- 2021-2022 - Released the version 5.0, and Rapid released - MongoDB 5.x, MongoDB Stable API, Atlas Serverless instances, MongoDB Atlas Data API
- 2022 - Released the version 6.0 - Atlas Serverless instances, Atlas Data API, Atlas CLI and Flexible Sync. Atlas Data Lase, Atlas Data Federation and Atlas SQL Interface. And Cluster-to-cluster sync.

## MongoDBs main Features

- Indexing

>   - This makes the searching though the database less time consuming and makes it easier. This means that every field in the documents are indexed with primary and secondary indices.

Reviewer: Split this into two bullets

- Replication

>   - This means the database makes copies of the data and sends it to multiple servers. Which make the data more available and redundant, if one server fails, the data can be retrieved from another server. A replica set can contain of two or more copies of the data, each set may act in the role of primary or secondary replica. Where it is the primary replica that serves as the main server and interacts with the client and performs the read/write operations. The secondary replica is a copy of the data of the primary using built-in replication. If the primary replica should fail, it automatically switches to the secondary, that then serves as the primary server.

Reviewer: Split

- Aggregation

>   - Makes it possible to perform operations on the grouped data, and then receive a single or computed result. This is thanks to the three different aggregation methods; aggregation pipeline, map-reduce function and a single-purpose aggregation methods.

Reviewer: You could also split this up

- Scalability
  - Through sharding you distribute the data to different servers, where the data is partitioned into chunks using a shard key. These chunks are evenly distributed across shards thats placed on different servers. This way MongoDB provides horizontal scalability, which balances the load to keep the system up and running, and gives less chance of hardware failure.
- Document-oriented
  - Each database contains a collection which contains documents. And each document can be different, with variations in number of fields and size.
  - The documents structure can be familiar to developers, as they are constructed like objects.
- Ad hoc queries
  - Supports search by field, range queries and by regular expression searches.

## Strengths

- It is schema-less - you don't need to design any schema.
- It's flexible.
- High-performing
- Available and Scalable.
- It replications makes it less prone to hardware failures.
- Programming languages - they have official drives for multiple programming languages, both major and a large number of smaller once.

## Weaknesses

> 

Reviewer: You should mention ACID here

Author: I've fixed the other issues/suggestions, this is a good point and I will need some more time to dig into this!

- CouchDB: indexing is limited, and for some workloads it requires a "design document" definition.

#### Query Language

- MongoDB: Uses their own query language, MongoDB Query Language (MQL). Designed for easy use for developers.
- CouchDB: Uses HTTP protocol for API, javascript.

#### Availability and Scalability

- MongoDB: Using replica and sharding mechanisms. Replica in short: Makes copies of the document so when primary fails, secondary will become primary. Makes it fault tolerant. Sharding in short: Makes it easy to scale collections over replica sets, geo-zone sharding makes it easy to manage data.
- CouchDB: Also uses a concept of replica and sharding. Replica in short: Makes copies of the documents, which makes this fault tolerant, but each "node" is also the shard, the sharding is a automated mechanism making it not possible for the user to define keys or groupings.

This comparison is created with the help of <a href="https://www.mongodb.com/compare/couchdb-vs-mongodb"> MongoDBs own comparison</a>, and <a href="https://couchdb.apache.org/"> CouchDBs homepage </a>.

## Summary

> Overall MongoDB is a strong NoSQL database. The strengths trumps over the weaknesses. MongoDB is easy to use, it has many features many developers look for, and it supports many different development languages, which makes it more accessible for different types of developers. It can contain big amounts of data and the data is easy accessed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overall MongoDB is a strong NoSQL database. In the author's view, the strengths trump the weaknesses. MongoDB is easy to use, it has many features many developers look for, and it supports many different development languages, which makes it more accessible for different types of developers. It can contain large amounts of data, and the data is easily accessed.
```
